README.md, before:

# freesound-credits

A command line utility to help you credit [Freesound](https://freesound.org)
samples for a given project more easily.

[![Commitlint](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/commitlint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/commitlint.yml)
[![Trufflehog](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/trufflehog.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/trufflehog.yml)
[![CI](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release-plz.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release-plz.yml)
[![Release](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release.yml)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/freesound%2Dcredits.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/freesound-credits)
[![License:
Apache-2.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Giving credits

Giving credits in the [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org) community
is often the sole requirement to freely use samples in your own creations. This
tool helps you abide to [Copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft) and
credit the generous artists that contribute sounds on
[Freesound](https://freesound.org), helping you being more creative.

Until today, giving credits may have been a process that you begrudged. This may
have been stopping you from giving credits altogether. Not because you didn't
want to, but because it was cumbersome and tedious.

Not anymore! Thanks to `freesound-credits` it takes seconds now!

## Install

Use [`cargo binstall`](https://github.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall) to install
`freesound-credits` directly from GitHub:

```shell
cargo binstall freesound-credits
```

### Homebrew

On Linux and macOS homebrew is also available:

```shell
brew install andreacfromtheapp/tap/freesound-credits
```

## Usage

The command line comes with a straight-forward usage function:

```bash
freesound-credits -h
```

### Usage example

1. open your favorite terminal.
2. `cd` to the folder where you want to save the credits file.
3. run `freesound-credits` on your desired samples folder.
4. if necessary, use the absolute path to the samples folder.

#### Ableton Example

Running against an Ableton `Samples/Imported` directory, will generate a
markdown file named `field-notes-credits.md` in the current directory.

```bash
freesound-credits -p Samples/Imported/ -t "Field Notes" -a "Aner Andros" -d "2025-01-09"
```

## Supported file names

`freesound-credits` matches samples adhering to Freesound naming standard that
kept their original samples names per downloads from the platform. For example:

- new standard with double underscore: `69604__timkahn__subverse_whisper.wav`
- old standard with single underscore: `2166_suburban_grilla_bowl_struck.flac`

## Supported DAWs

`freesound-credits` should work for any samples stored in a flat folder.
`freesound-credits` filters out metadata files associated with audio imports. To
add more DAWs and associated metadata or extraction, please
[file an issue](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=add_a_new_daw.yml&title=feat%28DAW%29%3A+add+).

|     DAW     |   Samples Folder   |  Metadata   | Extraction |                              Notes                               |
| :---------: | :----------------: | :---------: | :--------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------: |
|   Ableton   | `Samples/Imported` |   `.asd`    |     no     |                                                                  |
|   Reaper    |   `Audio Files`    | `.reapeaks` |     no     |                                                                  |
|   Renoise   |   `SamplesData`    |     no      |  `unzip`   |                [extraction](#renoise-extraction)                 |
| Logic Pro X |   `Audio Files`    |     no      |     no     | [Package vs Folder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=33zVydB4MiI) |

### Adding more DAWs

I did the best I could with what I have. I've tested it with Ableton, Reaper,
and Renoise projects on macOS. Logic Pro X uses no metadata and a clean Audio
files folder, thus I decided to add it but it hasn't been tested.

However, any DAW with these characteristics should work out of the box. I would
appreciate anybody confirming more DAWs or
[adding new ones](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=add_a_new_daw.yml&title=feat%28DAW%29%3A+add+).
When you do request or add a new DAW, please keep the
[above table](#supported-daws) and the [extra steps](#extra-daws-steps) section
in mind for any extra information.

## Extra DAWs steps

### Renoise extraction

Extract with `unzip your_project.xrns` first. Once unzipped, you will find a
`Song.xml` file and a `SamplesData` directory containing each `Instrument`.

## Contributing

Thanks for your help improving the project! :balloon: Happy to have you! Peruse
the [contributing guide](./docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) to help you get involved in the
project.

Commit message:

feat!: refactor w/ errors, better types, def template and tests
Signed-off-by: andreacfromtheapp
<3269984+andreacfromtheapp@users.noreply.github.com>

README.md, after:

# Freesound credits

A command line utility to help you credit [Freesound](https://freesound.org)
samples for a given project more easily.

[![Commitlint](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/commitlint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/commitlint.yml)
[![Trufflehog](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/trufflehog.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/trufflehog.yml)
[![CI](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release-plz.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release-plz.yml)
[![Release](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/actions/workflows/release.yml)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/freesound%2Dcredits.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/freesound-credits)
[![License:
Apache-2.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Giving credits

Giving credits in the [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org) community
is often the sole requirement to freely use samples in your own creations. This
tool helps you abide to [Copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft) and
credit the generous artists that contribute sounds on
[Freesound](https://freesound.org), helping you being more creative.

Until today, giving credits may have been a process that you begrudged. This may
have been stopping you from giving credits altogether. Not because you didn't
want to, but because it was cumbersome and tedious.

Not anymore! Thanks to `freesound-credits` it takes seconds now!

## Install

Use [`cargo binstall`](https://github.com/cargo-bins/cargo-binstall) to install
`freesound-credits` directly from GitHub:

```shell
cargo binstall freesound-credits
```

### Homebrew

On Linux and macOS homebrew is also available:

```shell
brew install andreacfromtheapp/tap/freesound-credits
```

## Usage

The command line comes with a straight-forward usage function:

```bash
freesound-credits -h
```

### Default template

By default, `freesound-credits` will use the following template. You can
customize the template per your needs, **as long as you use the expected
variables**, then save it and use it with the `-f` command option. If necessary,
use the absolute path to the template.

```toml
title="{song_title} Credits"
date={song_date}
author="{song_artist}"

[taxonomies]
tags=["Freesound", "{song_artist}", "Credits", "Custom"]
```

### Usage example

1. Open your favorite terminal.
2. `cd` to the folder where you want to save the credits file.
3. Run `freesound-credits` on your desired samples folder.
4. If necessary, use the absolute path to the samples folder.

#### Ableton Example

Running against an Ableton `Samples/Imported` directory, will generate a
markdown file named `field-notes-credits.md` in the current directory.

```bash
freesound-credits -s Samples/Imported/ -t "Field Notes" -a "Aner Andros" -d 2025-01-09 -w -f default-template.toml
```

## Supported filenames

`freesound-credits` matches samples adhering to Freesound naming standard that
kept their original samples names per downloads from the platform. For example:

- new standard with double underscore: `69604__timkahn__subverse_whisper.wav`
- old standard with single underscore: `2166_suburban_grilla_bowl_struck.flac`

## Supported DAWs

`freesound-credits` should work for any samples stored in a flat folder.
`freesound-credits` filters out metadata files associated with audio imports. To
add more DAWs and associated metadata or extraction, please
[file an issue](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=add_a_new_daw.yml&title=feat%28DAW%29%3A+add+).

|     DAW     |   Samples Folder   |  Metadata   | Extraction |                              Notes                               |
| :---------: | :----------------: | :---------: | :--------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------: |
|   Ableton   | `Samples/Imported` |   `.asd`    |     no     |                                                                  |
|   Reaper    |   `Audio Files`    | `.reapeaks` |     no     |                                                                  |
|   Renoise   |   `SamplesData`    |     no      |  `unzip`   |                [extraction](#renoise-extraction)                 |
| Logic Pro X |   `Audio Files`    |     no      |     no     | [Package vs Folder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=33zVydB4MiI) |

### Adding more DAWs

I did the best I could with what I have. I've tested it with Ableton, Reaper,
and Renoise projects on macOS. Logic Pro X uses no metadata and a clean Audio
files folder, thus I decided to add it but it hasn't been tested.

However, any DAW with these characteristics should work out of the box. I would
appreciate anybody confirming more DAWs or
[adding new ones](https://github.com/andreacfromtheapp/freesound-credits/issues/new?assignees=&labels=enhancement&projects=&template=add_a_new_daw.yml&title=feat%28DAW%29%3A+add+).
When you do request or add a new DAW, please keep the
[above table](#supported-daws) and the [extra steps](#extra-daws-steps) section
in mind for any extra information.

## Extra DAWs steps

### Renoise extraction

Extract with `unzip your_project.xrns` first. Once unzipped, you will find a
`Song.xml` file and a `SamplesData` directory containing each `Instrument`.

## Contributing

Thanks for your help improving the project! :balloon: Happy to have you! Peruse
the [contributing guide](./docs/CONTRIBUTING.md) to help you get involved in the
project.
